Logical quota documentation (main) (#418)
irods/irods_docs: docs/system_overview/quotas.md

## Logical Quotas

> This system is for enforcing quotas at the logical layer (i.e. collections and data objects). This can be achieved through the use of the [Logical Quotas rule engine plugin](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) or, as of 5.1.0, the built-in logical quotas system.

Reviewer: maybe this is enough.   i think it conveys that built-in is a replacement...

```suggestion
This system is for enforcing quotas at the logical layer (i.e. collections and data objects). This can be achieved through the use of the [Logical Quotas rule engine plugin](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) or, since 5.1.0, the built-in logical quotas system.
```

For more information on the rule engine plugin, see the [README](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) in the GitHub repository.

Further details about the built-in system can be found below.

### Comparison Versus Plugin

The built-in system offers the following advantages over the plugin:

- Passive system with variable recalculation rates
- No dependence on metadata
- No dependence on rules
- No dependence on PEPs
- Low overhead due to fewer server round trips

> However, the built-in system is passive, so realculation frequency affects how quickly crossing the quota threshold is enforced.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, because the built-in system is passive, recalculation frequency affects how quickly crossing the quota threshold is enforced.
```

### How to Enable Logical Quotas Enforcement

By default, logical quotas are unenforced. To enable enforcement, run the following:

```sh
iadmin set_grid_configuration logical_quotas enabled 1
```

Changes should take effect immediately. This is a zone-wide setting, and catalog consumers for a zone will consult the appropriate catalog provider to fetch enforcement status.

### Applying/Removing Logical Quotas

To apply a logical quota to a collection, use the `set_logical_quota` subcommand of `iadmin`.

The following example sets a logical quota of 100000 bytes for the home collection of user `alice#tempZone`.

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone/home/alice bytes 100000
```

Object limits are set in a similar manner. The following example sets a logical quota of 50 data objects on alice's home collection.

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone/home/alice objects 50
```

An administrator may wish to set both byte and object limits in a single command. The following example sets a logical quota of 300000 bytes and 1000 data objects for the `tempZone` zone collection.

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone 300000 1000
```

> Note that it is not allowed to set logical quotas on `/`, nor is it allowed to do so on a remote zone, e.g. `/remoteZone`. Admins may only apply logical quotas policy to zones under their jurisdiction.

Reviewer 2: Add empty line between L102 and L103.

### Updating Quota Usage Totals

Logical quota usage tracking is passive. iRODS will not auto-update quota usage totals as data changes. Administrators must run `iadmin calculate_logical_usage` or invoke a microservice to instruct iRODS to recalculate logical usage totals.

A common pattern for handling recalculation of quota usage totals is via a [cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) job or via the [Rule Engine's Delay Execution](../../plugins/pluggable_rule_engine/#delay-execution).

See [iadmin calculate\_logical\_usage](../../icommands/administrator/#calculate_logical_usage) for more information.

### Viewing Quota Information

Administrators can view quota information by running `iadmin list_logical_quotas`. 

By default, `iadmin list_logical_quotas` will list all logical quotas with no additional arguments.

Optionally, an administrator may issue an additional argument that specifies a collection. Any quotas applied to that collection or its ancestors will be returned.

The following example lists quotas for `/tempZone`, `/tempZone/home`, and `/tempZone/home/alice`, if any such quota exists.

```sh
iadmin list_logical_quotas /tempZone/home/alice
```

> See [iadmin list\_logical\_quotas](../../icommands/administrator/#list_logical_quotas) for more information.

Reviewer 2: Add empty line between L138 and L139.

## Logical Quotas

> This system is for enforcing quotas at the logical layer (i.e. collections and data objects). This can be achieved through the use of the [Logical Quotas rule engine plugin](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) or, as of 5.1.0, the built-in logical quota system.

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should phrase this such that it explains to the reader that the native implementation is derived from the plugin rather than making it seem like an alternative.

Author: Hmm, do we have example phrasing for that? It seems like being derived from the plugin would exactly qualify it for being an alternative, since they would overlap in responsibility. ...Unless we have a reason to suggest using both?

Reviewer: left a new comment, resolving this one.

> For more information on the rule engine plugin, see the [README](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) in the GitHub repository for more information.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information on the rule engine plugin, see the [README](https://github.com/irods/irods_rule_engine_plugin_logical_quotas) in the GitHub repository.
```

> There are further details about the built-in system below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further details about the built-in system can be found below.
```

> 
> ### Comparison Versus Plugin
> The built-in system offers the following advantages over the plugin:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Comparison Versus Plugin

The built-in system offers the following advantages over the plugin:
```

- Passive system with variable recalculation rates
- No dependence on metadata

> - No dependence on rule

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- No dependence on rules
```

- No dependence on PEPs

> - Low overhead due to fewer server round-trips

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Low overhead due to fewer server round trips
```

The built-in system has the following trade-offs:

> - Passive system: may not prevent over quota writes immediately, depending on recalculation frequency.

Reviewer 2: Period at the end of this line, but not on the list above.

Hmm.

Reviewer: perhaps something like...

```suggestion
- Passive system: recalculation frequency affects quota threshold enforcement
```

also, not great to have a list of one item.  maybe it should just be a sentence?

```suggestion
The built-in system is passive, so recalculation frequency affects how quickly crossing the quota threshold is enforced.
```

Reviewer 2: Yeah, maybe we try a single sentence and see what it looks like.

Author: I switched this to a sentence and left the above list elements with no period. Is that ok?

Reviewer: left a new one.  resolving.

> ### How to Enable Logical Quota Enforcement

Reviewer: i prefer plural everywhere as it's 'a system'.   a particular quota is defined/enforced/checked.

```suggestion
### How to Enable Logical Quotas Enforcement
```

> By default, logical quotas are unenforced. To enable enforcement, the grid configuration setting `logical_quotas::enabled` must be set to `1`. To this end, an administrator may issue

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, logical quotas are unenforced. To enable enforcement, run the following:
```

```sh

> iadmin set_grid_configuration enabled 1

Reviewer 2: Missing `logical_quotas` namespace arg?

> iadmin set_grid_configuration enabled 1

Reviewer: right... i think this is true?

```suggestion
iadmin set_grid_configuration logical_quotas enabled 1
```

```

> to enable enforcement. 

Reviewer 2: This can be removed.

> Changes should take effect immediately. This is a per-catalog setting, and catalog consumers for a zone will consult the appropriate catalog provider to fetch enforcement status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Changes should take effect immediately. This is a zone-wide setting, and catalog consumers for a zone will consult the appropriate catalog provider to fetch enforcement status.
```

### Applying/Removing Logical Quotas

To apply a logical quota to a collection, use the `set_logical_quota` subcommand of `iadmin`.

The following example sets a logical quota of 100000 bytes for the home collection of user `alice#tempZone`.

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone/home/alice bytes 100000
```

> Object limits are set in a similar manner. The following example sets a logical quota of 50 data objects for the home collection of the zone `tempZone`.

Reviewer 2: What does this mean? Shouldn't it say something about alice?

```
... for the home collection of the zone `tempZone`.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Object limits are set in a similar manner. The following example sets a logical quota of 50 data objects for alice's home collection.
```

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone/home/alice objects 50
```

An administrator may wish to set both byte and object limits in a single command. The following example sets a logical quota of 300000 bytes and 1000 data objects for the `tempZone` zone collection.

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone 300000 1000

> ```

Reviewer 2: This looks like a good place to state that applying a quota to `/` is disallowed. Consider including the reason for that decision so we don't forget.

To remove a logical quota, set the quota for the collection to a byte and object limit of 0.

> The following example removes a logical quota set on the `tempZone` zone collection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example removes any logical quotas for the `tempZone` zone collection.
```

```sh
iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone 0 0
```

> Note that logical quotas will apply to the entire collection tree rooted at the named collection. For example, a quota applied to `/tempZone/home` would apply a single consolidated limit to `/tempZone/home/alice`, `/tempZone/home/rods`, `/tempZone/home/bob`, and so on.

Reviewer 2: This could be put into a Note decorator to make it stand out.
```
!!! Note
    <words> ...
```

Up to you.

See [iadmin set\_logical\_quota](../../icommands/administrator/#set_logical_quota) for more information.

### Updating Quota Usage Totals

> Logical quota usage tracking is passive. iRODS will not auto-update quota usage totals as data changes. Administrators must run `iadmin calculate_logical_usage` or invoke a microservice to instruct iRODS to recalculate logical usage totals.

Reviewer 2: Seeing `calculate_logical_usage` makes me think we should rename the MSI to use the rest of the letters.

`_calc_` -> `_calculate_`

Reviewer: > Seeing `calculate_logical_usage` makes me think we should rename the MSI to use the rest of the letters.
>
> `_calc_` -> `_calculate_`

this is the moment.

Author: Renamed in `irods/irods`, so this should be good to go!

> A common pattern for handling recalculation of quota usage totals is via a [cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A common pattern for handling recalculation of quota usage totals is via a [cron](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cron) job or via the [Rule Engine's Delay Execution](../../plugins/pluggable_rule_engine/#delay-execution)
```

See [iadmin calculate\_logical\_usage](../../icommands/administrator/#calculate_logical_usage) for more information.

### Viewing Quota Information

Administrators can view quota information by running `iadmin list_logical_quotas`. 

By default, `iadmin list_logical_quotas` will list all logical quotas with no additional arguments.

> Optionally, an administrator may issue an additional argument that specifies a collection. Any quotas applied to that collection or its ancestors will be printed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Optionally, an administrator may issue an additional argument that specifies a collection. Any quotas applied to that collection or its ancestors will be returned.
```

> The following example lists quotas for `/`, `/tempZone`, `/tempZone/home`, and `/tempZone/home/alice`, if any such quota exists.

Reviewer 2: It lists quotas for `/`? But... quotas aren't allowed on `/`, right?

Reviewer: agreed.

Author: True. I wrote this up before we made that decision, actually, so I probably need to go back and update documentation where necessary. Noted!

iadmin set_logical_quota /tempZone/home/alice bytes 100000
```

> Object limits are set in a similar manner. The following example sets a logical quota of 50 data objects alice's home collection.

Reviewer 2: Missing word between `objects` and `alice's`?
